# Biology & Medical Engineering

更新日期：2026-07-08

## 今日子題

分子生物與基因體

## 今日重點

- From cloning to gene-editing: the enduring legacy of Dolly the sheep

## 內容

今天的「分子生物與基因體」新聞呈現出幾個共同線索：基因調控、分子機制，以及疾病相關生物標記。這些研究或觀測不只是單一事件，而是共同指向一個趨勢：科學家正透過更細緻的資料、更精密的儀器與更跨領域的方法，重新理解自然現象背後的機制。

### 核心脈絡

從Nature的報導來看，分子生物與基因體的進展通常不是靠單一突破完成，而是由觀測、實驗、模型與長期資料累積交互推動。因此，判讀今日新聞時，重點不只在於哪一項結果最吸睛，也在於它是否能補上既有理論或應用中的缺口。

### 關鍵進展

最突出的線索來自「From cloning to gene-editing: the enduring legacy of Dolly the sheep」。Nature, Published online: 06 July 2026; doi:10.1038/d41586-026-02096-1 Dolly’s brush with celebrity could hold lessons for current discussions about reproductive technologies.這類成果的價值，在於它為今日主題提供了一個可以被後續研究檢驗的切入點。

### 值得觀察

其中最值得後續追蹤的是「From cloning to gene-editing: the enduring legacy of Dolly the sheep」。它的意義不只在於單篇新聞本身，而在於後續是否會被更多觀測、實驗或同儕研究驗證。如果相關證據持續累積，這類成果就可能從新聞事件變成推動領域前進的穩定知識。

## 科學背景

本篇聚焦「分子生物與基因體」，整理今日相關新聞中的關鍵科學脈絡。

## 為什麼重要

這篇精華文章選取 1 篇與「分子生物與基因體」最相關且分數較高的文章，目標是把分散的新聞整理成可理解的科學脈絡。對一般讀者而言，這能幫助快速掌握今日重要進展；對長期追蹤者而言，則能看出哪些問題正在形成新的研究焦點。

## 參考來源

- [From cloning to gene-editing: the enduring legacy of Dolly the sheep](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-026-02096-1)

## 入選文章詳細內容

### From cloning to gene-editing: the enduring legacy of Dolly the sheep

Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript. You have full access to this article via your institution. The team at the Roslin Institute was overwhelmed with media requests about Dolly. Credit: Colin McPherson/Corbis/Getty Taxidermied, locked behind plexiglass and spinning slowly on a wooden dais in the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh, UK, the world’s most famous ewe remains a public spectacle three decades after her birth. First CRISPR horses spark controversy: what’s next for gene-edited animals? From that moment on 5 July 1996, Dolly the sheep — the first mammal cloned from an adult cell 1 — was destined for celebrity, and her imprint on science is still evident in fields such as developmental biology and biotechnology. Dolly’s creation demonstrated that an adult cell can be reprogrammed to an embryonic state, which opened up the possibility of creating stem cells from adult cells. Ten years on, in 2006, details of the first such induced pluripotent stem cells were published 2 . The first therapies made from these cells were conditionally approved this year in Japan . Reproductive cloning is now being used in agriculture to generate gene-edited cattle with no horns and pigs with organs that might be suitable for transplantation into humans. Moreover, an industry has sprung up to create copies of cherished pets, show animals and sport horses. But in one important respect, Dolly’s legacy is not that anticipated in the frantic weeks after news of her birth became public in 1997. From the start, much of the world’s media portrayed Dolly as a step towards the imminent creation of cloned humans. No such development has materialized. John Gurdon obituary: Biologist who made cloning possible First and foremost, myriad ethical questions would surround cloning a human, not to mention formidable technical obstacles. The nuclear transfer technique that made Dolly was difficult to perform successfully in primates; monkeys would not be cloned using this method until 2018 3 . The success rate is too low to consider the method in humans, and the risk of abnormalities resulting from the process is too high. However, other advances in reproductive technology have been arriving at breakneck speed. Stem-cell technology, spurred by Dolly’s birth, has led to the creation of models mimicking the human embryo, and of mouse eggs and sperm from stem cells. Researchers have also developed techniques to replace faulty mitochondria in human embryos, and are engineering increasingly sophisticated artificial wombs. Last month brought a fresh wave of excitement, and worry, about the potential use of advanced gene-editing methods on embryos to create heritable genetic changes 4 , 5 . It is a lot for the public to process, particularly in the field of reproduction, in which new technologies can be portrayed as the gateway to a dystopian future and can challenge our concepts of what it means to be human. The experience of Dolly and her handlers could hold valuable lessons in how to navigate the present landscape. Can a mouse be cloned indefinitely? Decades-long experiment has answers The researchers who cloned Dolly, led by respected embryologist Ian Wilmut, were caught flat-footed by the frenzy of press surrounding her birth, says Bruce Whitelaw, former director of the Roslin Institute, the animal-sciences research centre near Edinburgh where she was born (and now part of the University of Edinburgh). A year earlier, the team had demonstrated that sheep could be cloned by transferring the nucleus from an embryonic cell grown in culture into an egg cell from which the nucleus had been removed 6 . That feat led to around 150 media requests over a week. When Dolly was announced, the institute was overwhelmed with many times this level of interest, over more than a month. “It was absolutely bonkers,” Whitelaw recalls. “We weren’t ready for that.” The reaction to Dolly propelled genetics and reproductive biology into the public eye at a time when interactions between scientists and the media were less common than they are today, says Whitelaw. Now, ethicists, regulators and scientists are more joined up, and, increasingly, are thinking about what technologies might be next to emerge. Ian Wilmut, embryologist who helped to produce Dolly the sheep (1944–2023) But there is still no reliable system to prepare for the societal impact of those technologies, or to assess systematically how the public and other stakeholders might respond. Last month’s news that researchers are working out how to use a precise gene-editing technique to alter the DNA of human embryos highlights this. Some researchers say that not enough has been done to prepare the public or evaluate the ethics of heritable gene editing. Even in the absence of such systems, governments must develop sensible regulation of new reproductive technologies. One example to emulate could be that of the UK Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, which proactively develops policies on fertility treatments and research involving human embryos. At the same time, given the rapid pace of development, more countries need to adopt a structure to systematically help the public to evaluate and prepare for the possible outcomes of cutting-edge research in reproductive biology. Otherwise, confusion risks giving way to fear, and the hype that followed Dolly’s birth will inevitably be repeated. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-026-02096-1 Wilmut, I., Schnieke, A. E., McWhir, J., Kind, A. J. & Campbell, K. H. S. Nature 385 , 810–813 (1997). Takahashi, K. & Yamanaka, S. Cell 126 , 663–676 (2006). Liu, Z. et al. Cell 172 , 881–887 (2018). Bower, O. J. et al. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/
